And so we all have that sincere intention and request that our precious teachers can have
long life continue to teach and turn the wheel of Dharma, which is also taking that into our
own minds and hearts. And may it be reflected beautifully and clearly absorb into our minds
and our experience to be truly of benefit to all the boundless beings. So just kind of
as we always do before any study, before any contemplation, before any practice, it's really
always because it's the start, it's the path, it's the fruition, you know, to really connect
with our motivation, our motivation based on our joy, our appreciation for this special,
precious, rare, fleeting moment, touching on the nature with minds and hearts, softening,
welling, spreading with bodhicitta thoughts and great love, great appreciation, devotion,
trust and confidence in the true nature. So as much as we can connecting with the Vajrayana
vast view of how everything appearing is a pure forms of enlightenment. All sound is
the timeless, essential, perfect teaching, resounding and awakening. All mind and space
is the natural seat of the purity of all the phenomena arising, inseparable from bodhicitta.
And so we've been going over the nundra practice and the basics, you know, kind of reflecting
on the structure and the meaning of the different sections. We've briefly gone over, of course,
not only in our nundra sessions, but so much the really vital importance of really reflecting
on the four thoughts that turn the mind through the Dharma, reflecting on our freedoms and
endowments, on impermanence, on the infalliability of karma and the nature of samsara, which
is suffering and misunderstanding, misapprehending, suffering. So this, which naturally softens
our heart and minds as much as we can kind of recollect those at the beginning of any
practice or study, but as well as bring that out throughout the day, you know, our teachers
are always encouraging, bringing that out really sets us on the path because we're seeing things
as they are, which gives us, I think, a natural affinity to looking even more the beautiful
view that the Buddha gave us in Dharma. So turning our minds towards the inner extraordinary
foundation practice of the nundra practices, which as we've been going over more partly,
at least I've been kind of trying to touch on refuge and the section of refuge. And of
course, how that refuge is the gateway to all Buddhist practice, study and realization.
And that means it's not just a stepping stone. It means it's the full path. When we take
refuge from now until attaining enlightenment, we have the amount of joy, appreciation of
trust, confidence, closeness feeling to the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, you know, that we,
we can move towards that away from what's unreliable towards what's reliable within
the Buddha, within the Dharma, within the Sangha. And then within our practice here, this is
embodied as none other than Guru Padmasambhava, embodiment of all the Buddhas of this time
of all the Buddhas of the past, all Buddhas of the future, inseparable from the precious
teachers that actually appear in our life. So that really, the gateway and what keeps
that vast field of merit, accumulating our merit and wisdom is really is our trust, is
our devotion, which again, in the Buddhist way, that means we're examining, we're learning,
we're keeping open, we're exploring, you know, we're trying to increase our wisdom. So basically
we've gone over a little bit, you know, on the outer level, the Buddha, who is the Buddha,
what is a Buddha, we've gone over the Dharma, you know, in different ways, and we can do
plenty more with all these things. But maybe on the outer level, the outer Dharma, all
the teachings of the Buddha and Guru Padmasambhava, which can be all summed up into, you know,
the three baskets, or the three trainings, you know, because there's both within Dharma,
there's the words, and then there's the realization. And that's our contemplation and our training
that brings up that realization. So training in conduct, no matter where we, in all of
the aspects of the Nainanas, all the teachings on conduct, what to accept, what to let go
of, all the teachings on concentration, developing our concentration. And then most important
and most essential, you know, is bringing out our wisdom of knowing, seeing how directly
how things are. And having more and more confidence with that, the more and more we engage and
explore with open mind, open heart, and we're supported on the outer level by the Sangha,
by all those from the time of the Buddha appearing into the world, up until this day, it's due
to the Sangha, like we kind of reflected a little upon last week. And of course, many
rich aspects to the Buddha Dharma Sangha. So we've reflected a little on the outer,
outer three jewels embodied as Guru Padmasambhava, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha. We've
also touched on a little bit about the inner three jewels, which are also known as the three
roots, the Guru, the Deva, the Dakini, the source of all blessings, the source of all
accomplishment and realization, the source of all enlightened activity is the nature.
And of course, in our practice, that's the Guru, the Deva, Dakini, or in Tibetan, the
Lama, the Yidam, and the Khandro. That's the inner kind of how the Guru Rinpoche embodies
the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, the Guru Rinpoche embodies all of the Gurus, all of
the mandalas of accomplished accomplishment of all of the enlightened mandalas of the
deities, all enlightened activities of the Dakinis are embodied inseparably within Guru
Padmasambhava. Now the inner aspect of the three jewels and the three roots is then,
or I'm sorry, I said the inner, maybe we're looking at outer, inner, secret, absolute,
it's kind of just looking at those little frames to give our conceptual mind a little frame
to reflect as we go, as we're reflecting on the beautiful qualities and abilities and
powers of the three jewels embodied as Guru Padmasambhava. So the outer, inner, outer
three jewels, inner three roots, secret, is then the beautiful, pure nature of our own
body and that's fully developed within Guru Padmasambhava. So that's in the aspect of
thinking Buddha that the essence element, the essential element of our life force is
like the Buddha completely purified as is in Guru Rinpoche's case and then that essence
element pervades our whole, the sacred mandala of our body. It moves through that by the
winds, by the energy moving and that is the winds, that's the Dharma, that's the mandalas
of the deities. And then those essence element is moved by the wind through the channels,
which is like the Sangha. This is on the secret level of the three jewels, the three roots,
the winds, the channels, the essence element. So just briefly going over these, as we've
all heard some degree of teachings on these, but just remembering this is what we're having
a great trust in, in these teachings, these practices and their realization. In the absolute
level we're taking refuge absolutely in just our timeless awareness inherent in every single
being whether they've realized it or not. Our Buddha nature or as we're called in our
practice Rigpa, our awareness, the essential essence which we have some degree of confidence
in the view and actually we see the great realization in these great masters realizing
the absolute Buddha is Dharmakaya, realizing that the Sambhogakaya is absolute Dharma. The
Manakaya is the absolute Sangha. All mind, all space, all movement, all speech, all phenomena.
Or another way of looking at that is the vast vastness, empty aspect of even our own mind
is the Dharmakaya, we take refuge in. Inseparable from that, that clarity, the arising energy
is the Sambhogakaya aspect. And then of course then that all-pervading compassion, our whole
experience is the nirmanakaya or our nirmanakaya. And then this great three-caya Buddha of our
guru Padmasambhava is appearing before us. Again it's recognizing it or not. And then
we've been giving the gifts and the opportunity to practice all this. So just kind of bringing
together these aspects of the three jewels, the three roots, reflecting as we do our practice.
I'm just saying let's do that as we do that. Reflect on the outer Buddha, inner Buddha.
I mean it's our outer three jewels, inner three jewels, secret three jewels, absolute
three jewels. That's our practice. And then of course the other thing I thought to just
look upon today is because of course as we do our practice, we're the refuge. Traditionally
we're doing prostrations. So I just thought again our time is short and I know we're really
being encouraged to practice more than just talk. But I thought I'd go over real briefly
just a little bit on the actual practice of prostrations, which we do with that. So as
we are in that part of the practice, prostrations we know there's three kinds of prostrations
we do. And of course prostrations are the gestures we make with our body. That's kind
of what we think of mostly when we think of prostrations, right? Holding our hands, touching
our three centers, touching our five points to the ground, that's that outer prostration.
We'll go over that briefly. But then on the inside, again everything that's a motivation
that makes all the difference, the inside prostrations are coming from having reflected
on the Dharma, the Buddha, the Dharma, the Sangha, the lives and examples of all the
great masters. That joy, that appreciation, that trust is what's animating our practice
as we're going. That's what's happening inside with our prostrations. And then we have our
body moving, we have our speech, we're reciting these two simple lines but so profound, so
concise but so rich in meaning of what we're doing. So we can really reflect on that as
we go, but we're prostrating also as much as we're making these gestures of devotion,
surrender with our body. We're also reciting with our speech, you know, the expression
of our joy and our appreciation, our courage and our commitment to the path, to enlightenment
for the benefit of all beings. That's what we're doing every day, again and again, reflecting
on these things and making, connecting with that joy, appreciation and commitment expressed
with our voice. And then of course with a mind full of joy, devotion, appreciation,
so we're doing that. And they say too, you know, the benefits of prostration, all the
all Buddhist teachings, right, are removing our obscurations and bringing out our innate
goodness qualities and abilities and power, realizing the enlightened body, enlightened
speech, enlightened mind, enlightened qualities, actualizing enlightened activity, which is
nothing but bodhicitta activity, more and more and more natural. And so that's also
the benefits of prostrations is that we're uprooting and knocking down our obscurations
and our obstacles. So they say in general, of course, we're purifying our ignorance,
our attachment, our anger, you know, all the five poisons are kind of uprooted in Dharma
practice. And bringing out all, you know, the five wisdoms, we move through the five
paths and 10 boomies until we realize Buddhahood become objects of refuge. The main, one of
the main really renowned things that prostrations and praise does though, among all of removing
all our negative habitual patterns and emotions, is really helping knock down our arrogance
and pride. You know, not the natural good pride of having some respect for ourselves,
but the arrogance where we actually cut ourselves off from growing, you know, like a cup turned
upside down will never get and be filled with anything except shadows. So anyway, so we're
kind of, they just in the teachings, prostrations are really helping to uproot our habitual
pattern of specially our arrogance. Why? Because it's not just knocking it down. We're actually
thinking, exploring, like really recollecting everything we've heard and learned and practiced
all the great examples, you know, it's all coming into the practice we're doing, reflecting
on all the meanings. And then we're keeping with it as we go. I mean, anyone who's done
prostrations, especially many, it's a very skillful means activity. So anyway, so we're
also working with that. And then, so maybe we should, I don't know, is it worth time
wise getting up and doing, or maybe just when we get to prostrations? Yeah, well, I'll just
say briefly, just since we're doing a little summary of things, you know, so they say to
the benefits of prostrations, they say even in the teachings, just holding, you know,
progressing with our body, holding our hands to our hearts before like a representation
of the three jewels, of the three roots has vast, vast benefits the Buddha said, you know,
such as we're born into good births with healthy, beautiful, healthy bodies and wealth and
intelligence.
And, you know, the ability to communicate beautifully and meaningfully, and with more
and more devotion, and a lot of outer attributes that are kind of wonderful, but the real benefit
of that is what is we're actually able to share that we're able to share the Dharma
to share, you know, just health and wealth and wisdom, you know, so gloss over that quickly
because our time is there. But then again, deep down, like when we're, we're standing,
we have our, our hands in what's called the blooming lotus mudra, the blossoming lotus
mudra, or you know, hands aren't totally tight together or way apart. It's kind of like a
lotus bud beginning to bloom, holding at our heart, right, the seat of our essence element
and Buddha nature. And then, then we make, again, I'm reviewing kind of obvious but just
again, connecting all these words I've been saying with our crown chakra, our speech chakra,
our heart, and then we put our five, five points to the ground. And here, we're doing
full prostrations. So we'll get to that. But when we, they say too in the teachings, when
we're putting our, with devotion and joy and reciting, putting our, our hands to our crown,
it's also removing all of our body obscurations, to our speech, moving all of our speech obsc
urations,
to our heart, removing all our mind obscurations. When we put our five, our five points to our
forehead, our two hands, our two knees, stretched out on the floor, we're also just surrendering
all of our five poisons, removing all of our, our ignorance, all our aversion and anger,
all of our arrogance, all of our attachment, all of our jealousy, all our doubt and hesitation,
releasing. And that means we're also, again, we're not just getting rid of anything, we're
removing what's unnatural, we're bringing out and creating through our intention and
our motivation and our joy and devotion, that beautiful connection to receive all the blessings,
the body blessings, the speech blessings, the mind blessings. We're, we're to receive
all, you know, realizing all the five wisdoms, move through all the five paths, bring out
all the qualities of the five caayas, which means bringing out our enlightened, our own
innate enlightened body, speech, mind, full of enlightened qualities and natural bodhicitta,
enlightened activities. So we're removing, just like the word Sanjay, removing our obscurations
are being completely purified, and we're bringing out the full bloom of all our own realization,
creating the circumstances of generating our merit through connecting with our joy, our
trust and keeping with the practice. And then they say, yeah, so I'm going to start talking
and we should just do practice soon. So I really do want to keep time for practice.
So when we get up to do prostrations, we'll maybe just go over those outer things and
we can just bring up a couple little points when we do that, if that's not too distracting.
So thank you. Of course, there's always more to say, but that's what's so beautiful about
the Dharma, but relaxing. One more really vital important point is to as we're doing our practice,
relax, even though this is very vigorous physical activity, which helps purify, you know, like
I said, our three doors, straighten our channels, let our winds flow clearly, let our essence
element just shine more brightly and balanced and centered. Also reflecting whatever pith
instructions, pointing out instructions we've had, remembering that absolute refuge, even
as we're prostrating, just trying, even though there is the dance and the display of subject,
I'm prostrating, you know, objects to Guru Rinpoche, you know, and the action of prostrating
and reciting and emanating all of our bodies, trillions and billions and millions of times,
all of our own bodies prostrating together with all the beings of the six realms. While
all of that display is happening to reflect on those essential instructions that are beyond
object, action, just that vast, open, quiet, spacious nature of our mind is connecting
with that as much as we can as we are doing all of our practice. But here we're talking
about refuge, taking refuge in that, which means relax, reflect on that. And the transcendental
wisdom rainbow display of every, all the skillful means we're doing to help bring out our wisdom
and our compassion. So we'll sit for a couple of minutes and then we'll start our practice.
I think everyone knows we're in our Trisharnundra. I think we have time again today. We'll just
do the seven line prayer and then go to the quick lineage prayers and then go to the calling
of the Lama from afar. Again, reflecting on the meaning as we're reciting.
[silence] [singing]
[singing]
Freedoms and favorable conditions of this human birth are extremely difficult to obtain.
Everything born is impermanent and bound to die.
The results of virtuous and unvirtuous actions which are causes are inexorable.
The three realms of cyclic existence at the nature of an ocean of suffering.
Remembering this in my mind, turned towards the Dharma.
[coughing]
And again, feeling the presence and seeing the refuge tree before us.
Rising up from great, glorious lake in the jewel.
Lotus stalk with five branches in the center is Guru Padmasambhava in all his glorious splendor.
Above him all the great lineage masters of this ocean lineage.
With all the Buddhas of the past, present and future to the side.
Along with all the Arhats and Bodhisattvas to the other side.
All the Dharmapalas and the deities of the three roots before.
All the self-resounding Dharma texts behind.
And then with our own body, with our Mother and Father of this life to our sides.
And all the infinite beings of samsara before us.
And then emanating our body again with the instructions.
We'll do the prostrations with refuge.
Again, the essence of refuge is joy, devotion, trust, confidence, commitment.
Bodhicitta.
[music]
From now, until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the lama, the three jewels.
We'll get up and we'll do maybe about five minutes or so of prostrations.
Like I said, I'll just also just say a few points.
I think everyone's somewhat familiar, but I know some couple people had asked some questions.
But just we'll go over that, too.
I don't know, too, if the camera at where it is works or if someone just wants to lift it up.
I'll just go through that.
So we can all get up and do.
But it's one thing when you're doing the prostrations here at Padmasamyaling.
We have this nice marble floor, which when we're just doing a few prostrations,
you don't really need anything.
But if you're doing a lot of prostrations, when this is good, if you have a hardwood floor
or whatever, having a smooth surface is good.
Especially if it's stone or something cold, it's good to have a little padding.
So if you have a towel or a blanket, you can fold just to the width of your body.
You can also then fold it a little bit more to give your knees just a little bit of padding.
Then you have that.
And if you have some gloves or oven mitts or something, it can help make your hands be able to
slide on the floor easily.
And also just protect your tendons and things from the cold.
Can you see here?
Should I move it all?
Come here.
So anyway.
I think we know when we stand, we want to stand with our...
Again, our motivation is most important.
But then too, instructions, keeping good alignment, really glorifying our joy, our devotion, our
courage, our commitment.
So we want to hold our bodies well for the well-being of our body now and also in our future lives
as well.
So anyway, having our feet below our hips and together, not spread out or pigeon, but our knees
above our toes, standing.
And then, like I said, I'm holding this now but I want to hold our hands in the lotus blooming mud
ra.
From now until I take refuge in the llama, the three jewels, going out, stretching all the way out,
coming quickly up.
So again, bringing our hands to our three centers, looking out.
I think we all know.
But as we go too, just really being careful with your body, you can kind of adjust as you go.
Kind of hold yourself up a little bit and lower yourself down and spread out so you're not always
rocking back and forth on your knees.
You can adjust and then be careful with your hands, letting your hands really be together, stretch
out.
And I say too, the blessings we bring to the environment when we do full prostrations, it just
brings every atom, just brings so many blessings.
In fact, I think some great masters said that if we knew more about the benefits of doing prostr
ations, we'd wish our body could stretch further.
So anyway, now we'll just do this for a few minutes.
From now until I take refuge in the llama, the three jewels, going out, taking refuge in the llama,
the three jewels, going out, stretching all the way out.
All right.
Thank you.